Neuo Project raw data:				
				
	structure:	Description:	Pathology:	Additional info/links:
1	Spinal Trigeminal nucleus	One of three trigeminal nuclei -- this one is respondible for facial pain and temperature sensation	Involved in Lateral Medullary syndrome (link diagram)	
2	Lateral VST	Extrapyramidal pathway that is involved in maintaining correct posture with input from the cerebellum -- this particular component of the VST projects to the isilateral lumbar region and activates extensor neurons in the legs	Lesions in the brainstem above the lateral vestibular nuclei result in disinhibition of the lateral VST, which leads to powerful extension in all four extremities (Decerebrate posturing). When this is seen, it suggests a poor prognosis in comatose patients.	
3	Ventral VST	Extrapyramidal pathway that assistd with controling head and whole body orientation		
4	MLF	A bundle of axons on each side of the brainstem, which conducts information from cranial nerves III, IV, and VI, and is thus involved in visual movements. Its chief function is to coordinate eye movements via these nerves in response to input from the frontal eye fields. 	Lesions result in INO (intranuclear opthalmoplegia), which is seen in various Stroke syndromes, as well as MS. 	stroke diagrams involving MLF pp. 117-119
5	Tectospinal Tract	Originates from superior and inferior colliculi (responsible for visual and auditory reflexes, respectively). This tract innervates the cervical anterior horn cells and is important in head turning to localize incoming visual and auditory info. 		
6	Lateral Spinothalamic & Spinotectal tracts	Lateral STT carries pain and temperature sensation from the peripheral nerves to the thalamus. 	Lesions result in lack of temperature or pain sensation and the distribution of these deficits can aid in the localization of said lesion	
7	Rubrospinal tract	An extrapyrimidal motor control pathway that initiates in the red nucleus and terminates in the thoracic spinal cord (Hence, mostly involved in function of upper extrmity muscle movements). It primarily functions to regulate flexor while inhibiting extensor tone. 	Lesions involving this tract result in movement disturbances and tremors	
				
8	Area Postrema	A circumventricular organ (lacks BBB) found along the caudal wall of the 4th ventricle -- Detects certain toxins resulting in nausea/vomitting. Thus known as the "Vomiting center"	Results in vomiting often seen during chemotherapy (ie: Cisplatin)	
9	Dorsal Motor nucleus of CN X	This is the parasympathetic input to the vagus nerve. Activation of this nucleus results in bronchial constriction, bradycardia, and stimulation of digestion/peristalsis (aka rest and digest)		note that this structure is involved with solitarius in baroreceptor reflex -- diagram pp.63
10	Hypoglossal nucleus (XII)	Control of tongue	Medial Medullary syndrome -- deviation of tongue away from hemiplegia; long term ipsilateral tongue weakness and atrophy (diagram pp. 64)	
	MLF (2)			
11	Spinal Trigrminal tract	Carries facial pain and temperture sensation to spinal trigeminal nucleus -- Found in the medulla and is the rotral continuation of the substantia gelatinosa in the spinal cord	Involved in Lateral Medullary syndrome (link diagram)	
	Spinal Trigeminal nucleus (2)			
12	Nucleus Ambiguus	This is the motor nucleus for craial nerves IX and X. 	In ALS this nucleus degenerates, which leads to bulbar palsy (dysarthria and dysphagia. This nucleus is also involved in lateral medullary syndrome via occlusion of the vertebral artery or PICA. This syndromeinvolves several structures supplied by these arteries, but hoarseness, dysphagia, decreased gag reflex, and hiccups are the speciic findings related to infarction of the nucleus ambiguus.	consider adding LMSx diagram with description of symptoms? pp. 62 in syllabus
13	Inferior Olivary nucleus	Connected to red nucleus via the central tegmental tract	Lesion of CTT, which usually occurs in the pons, can result in palatal myoclonus	
14	CST	Primary motor pathway	Contralateral spastic weakness in Medial medullary syndrome (infarction at medullary pyramid) (diagram pp.64)	
15	Medial lemniscus	Pathway of posterior columns through medulla (after decussation of internal arcuate fibers)	Medial Medullary syndrome -- contralateral loss of vibration and proprioception (diagram pp. 64)	
	Tectospinal Tract (2)			
16	Fasicles of Hypoglossal nerve (XII)	Carry motor info from hypoglossal nucleus to direct movement of tongue	Lesions result in ipsilateral tongue weakness and atrophy	
	Lateral VST (2)			
	Rubrospinal tract (2)			
17	Reticular formation	Forms core of the entire brainstem (notice it is present in very coronal slice). Responsible for maintaining conciousness ("wakes up" the cortex). Also maintains muscle tone & posture, processes noxious stimuli, and regulates major visceral functions (BP, Respirations, GI function, Cardiac function)	Even a small lesion in the brainstem can result in a Coma if there is involvement of the reticular formation. 	
18	Nucleus solitarius (and tract)	Recieves input from cranial nerves VII, IX, and X. Taste (anterior 2/3 of tongue from VII, posterior 1/3 from IX; info then passed through solitariothalamic tract to the VPM thalamus). Important for blood pressure regulation (IX from carotids, X from aortic arch, and also X from stretch receptors in lungs).  Also important area for induction of sleep. 	Lesions can regult in blood pressure instability, tachycardia, loss of taste	image of taste pathway pp. 61. Description of Baroreceptor reflex as well as picture pp. 63 (note this involves dorsal motor nucleus of CN X as well)
				
	Spinal Trigrminal tract (2)			
	Spinal Trigeminal nucleus (3)			
19	Facial nucleus (VII)	Recall, there are 5 major branches of the facial nerve -- Temporal, Zygomstic, Buccal, Marginal mandibular, Cervical (To Zanzibar By Motor Car)	Pontine lesion here results in Millard-Gubler syndrome (Basilar artery stroke) -- Note that since the CST is adjacent, the patient will have a contralateral hemiplegia. CN VII involvement will result in LMN facial weakness (ie: involvement of upper and lower face ipsilaterally)	diagram pp. 69
	Medial lemniscus (2)			
20	Pyramidal tract (Corticospinal & Corticobulbar tract)	Primary motor pathway prior toits decussation in the medulla	Lesion results in contralateral hemiparesis (mostly hand clumsiness) because the pathway has not crossed yet	
21	Fasicles of Abducens nerve (VI)	Recall CN VI is responsible for abduction of the eyes, hence "abducens" nerve	Pontine lesion  results in Millard-Gubler syndrome (Basilar artery stroke) -- Note that since the CST is adjacent, the patient will have a contralateral hemiplegia. CN VI nucleus involvement will result in ipsilateral medial deviation of the eye.	Pontine stroke diagram pp. 69
22	Facial nerve (VII)	Recall, there are 5 major branches of the facial nerve -- Temporal, Zygomstic, Buccal, Marginal mandibular, Cervical (To Zanzibar By Motor Car). CN Seven innervates the Stapedius muscle in the ear.	Involved in corneal reflex -- lesion will result in no direct pupillary response, but intact consensual pupillary response. UMN lesion involving corticobulbar tract => results in more lower facial weakness than upper facial weakness (since uppr face has bilateral input). LMN lesion => results in lower facial weakness (Bell's Palsy). Lesion involving Chorda tympani results in decreased taste sensation.	corneal reflex pp. 67. UMN/LMN lesions and CN VII course pp. 68
	Tectospinal Tract (3)			
23	Abducens nucleus	Sends motor information to lateral rectus muscle of the eye via the abducens nerve (VI), fascilitating abduction		Lesions result in ipsilateral medial deviation of the eye 	
	MLF (3)			
24	Lateral Vestibular nucleus (VIII)	The terminating nucleus many fibers of the vestibular nerve. Much of the ascending info passes through the MLF and is involved in coordinating eye movements with variation in head position.		
25	Superior vestibular nucleus (VIII)	Also recieves ascending info from the vestibular nerve. Involved in sending input to cranial nerves III and IV via the MLF. 		
26	4th Ventricle	The lowest ventricle in the brain, sitting in the pons and extending into the upper medulla. 		In Dandy-Walker malformation, lack of the proper developemnt of the foamen of Magendie leads to dilation of the 4th ventricle, which prevents development of the cerebellum.	Diagram pp. 181
				
27	Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (V)	Responsible for proprioceptive info from the teeth, hard palate, and muscle sof mastication. Helps with control of muscles involved in eating via close connection to motor trigeminal nucleus. Mediates jaw jerk reflex.		image pp. 67
28	Motor trigeminal nucleus (V)	Responsible for activation of muscles of mastication and some other sall muscles (ie: Tensor tympani, etc.)	Lesion leads to chin deviation to the side of the lesion (just like deviation of the tongue in lesion to hypoglossal nucleus)	
29	Principle trigeminal (sensory) nucleus (V)	Responsible for facial tactile and pressure sensation. Also mediates corneal reflex by communicating with the bilateral motor nuclei of CN VII. Also recieves visceral sensation from the tongue (but not taste! recall, taste is via VII and IX)		
30	Trigeminal nerve	Consists of opthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular branches (exit through superior orbital fissure, foramen rotundum, and foramen ovale respectively). Mandibular branch carries motor input from motor trigeminal nucleus that activate muscles of mastication. Also innervates Tensor tympani in the ear.	Opthalmic branch of V involved in corneal reflex -- lesion will result in no direct or consensual pupillary response (when that eye is tested)	Diagram pp. 66 (face), diagram pp 67 (corneal reflex)
31	Central Tegmental tract	Connects the red nucleus with the inferior olivary nucleus	Lesion of CTT, which usually occurs in the pons, can result in palatal myoclonus	
	Medial lemniscus (3)			
	Pyramidal tract (Corticospinal & Corticobulbar tract) (2)			
	Tectospinal  Tract (4)			
	Rubrospinal tract (3)			
	Superior vestibular nucleus (VIII) (2)			
	Reticular formation (2)			
	MLF (4)			
	4th Ventricle (2)			
				
32	Trochlear Nucleus (IV)	Responsible for moving eye down and in	lesions result in superior oblique weakness -- patients have trouble looking down and in (ie: trouble reading or walking down stairs). They will also typically tilt their heads to the opposite shoulder to compensate.	
33	Nucleus of inferior Colliculus 	Recieves input from various auditory pathways as well as the auditory cortex. Central point in the CNS for perception, integration, and relay of auditory information. Also involved in startle response to sounds.		
	Reticular formation (3)			
34	Substantia Nigra	Dopamine producing structure that plays critical roles in movement, learning and reward, and thus also addiction. Divided into the Pars compacta and Pars reticulata. Degeneration of the Pars Compacta leads to various hypokinetic movement disorders related to disruption of the dopamine producing neurons in this structure. This leads to neurodegenerative illness such as Parkinson's disease. The Pars Reticulata is an important inhibitory GABAergic motor relay between the basal ganglia and motor thalamus.	Diseases involving disruption of the Substantia Nigra include Parkinson's Disease, Multisystem Atrophy (MSA), and possibly Schizophrenia	
	Rubrospinal tract (4)			
	Medial lemniscus (4)			
	Tectospinal  Tract (5)			
	Central Tegmental tract (2)			
	MLF (5)			
	Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (V) (2)			
35	CN IV fasicles	The only nerve to exit on the dorsal side of the brain stem	lesions result in superior oblique weakness -- patients have trouble looking down and in (ie: trouble reading or walking down stairs). They will also typically tilt their heads to the opposite shoulder to compensate.	
36	Cerebral Aquaduct (of Sylvius)	Small CSF duct within midbrain which connects the 3rd and 4th ventricles	Obstruction of the duct (malformation, tumor growth, etc,) can result in non-communicating hydrocephalus	
				
37	Pineal Body	Small endocrine gland that produces melatonin, which is involved in circadian as well as seasonal sleep patterns.	Lesions here most often result in some form of upgaze paralysis since the adjacent dorsal midbrain is resposible for vertical eye movements (ie: thalamic hemorrhages, PSP, pineal tumor, Parinaud's -- all cause restricted vertical eye movement). Lesions of the Pineal gland specifically often result in Parinaud's syndrome, which includes vertical gaze paralysis as well as large/irregular pupils (similar to neurosyphilis), eyelid abnormalities (bilateral lid retraction when patients try to gaze upwards), and convergence-retraction nystagmus (eyes converge on attemted upgaze).	
	Cerebral Aquaduct (of Sylvius) (2)			
	Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (V) (3)			
38	Oculumotor nucleus (III)	Supplies Oculumotor nerve which is responssible for medial rectus, inferior oblique, inferior rectus, superior rectus, and levator palpebrae (pupillary constriction)	Lesions of CN III lead to difficulties moving the eye, which is most often deviated down and out laterally. This may be accompanied by ptosis and mydriasis (pupillary dilation) as a result of involvement of the parasympathetic CN III fibers (From the edinger-westphal nucleus). Further lesios that involve the 3rd nerve include: 1. Weber's Syndrome (midbrain cerebral peduncle infarction including 3rd nerve as it passes by -- ipsilateral 3rd nerve palsy, contralateral hemiplegia). 2. Uncal Herniation (Usually seen in context of a comatose patient with a large supratentorial mass lesion -- very ominous finding). 3. Posterior communicating aneurism (Must be considered when 3rd nerve palsy coincides with an acute onset of headache). 4. Ischemia of 3rd nerve (typically spares the pupillary fibers -- common in diabetics). 5. Cavernous sinus thrombosis (Presents with proptosis, chemosis, cranial neuropathies of III, IV, VI, V1, headache, and fever)	Diagram pp. 72
	MLF (6)			
	Central Tegmental tract (3)			
	Medial lemniscus (5)			
	Substantia Nigra (2)			
39	Oculumotor nerve (III)	responssible for medial rectus, inferior oblique, inferior rectus, superior rectus, and levator palpebrae (pupillary constriction)	Lesions of CN III lead to difficulties moving the eye, which is most often deviated down and out laterally. This may be accompanied by ptosis and mydriasis (pupillary dilation) as a result of involvement of the parasympathetic CN III fibers (From the edinger-westphal nucleus). Further lesios that involve the 3rd nerve include: 1. Weber's Syndrome (midbrain cerebral peduncle infarction including 3rd nerve as it passes by -- ipsilateral 3rd nerve palsy, contralateral hemiplegia). 2. Uncal Herniation (Usually seen in context of a comatose patient with a large supratentorial mass lesion -- very ominous finding). 3. Posterior communicating aneurism (Must be considered when 3rd nerve palsy coincides with an acute onset of headache). 4. Ischemia of 3rd nerve (typically spares the pupillary fibers -- common in diabetics). 5. Cavernous sinus thrombosis (Presents with proptosis, chemosis, cranial neuropathies of III, IV, VI, V1, headache, and fever)	
	Rubrospinal tract (5)			
40	Red nucleus	Connected to inferior olivary nucleus via the central tegmental tract. Red nucleus is also the origin of the rubrospinal tract which serves a function similar to the CST, but is mainly concerned with the distal extremities.	Lesion of CTT, which usually occurs in the pons, can result in palatal myoclonus	
	Reticular formation (4)			
41	Tectospinal tract (5)			
42	Edinger-Westphal nucleus (III)	Key nucleus involved in Pupillary light response -- Pathway: Optic nerve => optic chiasm => optic tract => pretectal area => posterior comissure => bilateral edinger-westphal nuclei & stimulation of both 3rd nerves => ciliary ganglia => pupil constriction	Lesions in pathway: 1. I there is direct right pupillary constriction but not consensual constriction -- patient must have a left 3rd nerve palsy. 2.  Lesion of optic nerve (as seen in diagram) -- results in afferent pupillary defect; note that optic nerve lesions are always symmetrical due to equal edinger-westphal stimulation. 3. Lesion of bilateral pretectal area -- results in pupils that respond to accomodation but not light (seen in tertiary syphilis and known as argyll-robertson pupil). 	diagram pp. 75
43	Periaquaductal Gray	structure involved in pain sensation	Contains opiod/morphine receptors -- important in pain control	
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
